guns for rays and leather jackets maybe
the images you associate most with the
Black Panther Party but what you may not
know is how the political group shifted
healthcare in the u.s. to be more
community-based our government is not
gonna provide healthcare so we were
gonna provide healthcare for the people
the Black Panthers opened three medical
facilities created the very first
nationwide screening program for sickle
cell anemia a blood disorder and they
even helped establish the forms
acupuncture that's still in use today we
spend a lot more time serving the people
than we did protesting or defending
ourselves from the police so why isn't
the Black Panthers healthcare activism
more widely known well it may be by
design history is written by the victim
the Black Panthers are not writing the
history of the Black Panther Party hey
Sam
I'm a Mayan and this Sunday on aj+ we're
exploring the Black Panther Party
history healthcare legacy and hi covert
government program tried to bury it all
[Music]
to understand what prompted the Black
Panthers go right into health care you
first have to understand why it came
into existence here's how co-founder QEP
Newton explained the group we are bound
to transform society and erect a system
where people will receive justice
the Panthers formed on the heels of the
civil rights movement a time when the
push for racial equality and equity
divided the u.s. 1965 was a pivotal year
that helped spark the Panthers creation
according to former Black Panther at
Billy Jennings we had the murder of
Malcolm X in February also you had the
the signing of the Voting Rights Act of
1965 and also you had to watch ride
happiness all of the 1935 along with the
sound of March in 1965 then in the fall
of 1966 a white police officer ran down
and killed an unarmed teenager and a
historically black neighborhood in San
Francisco it was a breaking point the
community rioted the governor declared a
state of emergency and the next day
National Guard soldiers marched with
bayonets through the streets
this was the fertile ground in America's
landscape that prompted Newton and Bobby
Seale to found the Black Panthers party
for self defense in October 1966 the
Black Panthers initial mission was to
police the police panthers follow patrol
vehicles ready to defend their
communities with force if they felt the
need arose this is a part of their
legacy that the world remembers but the
physical self-defense was a fraction of
the Panthers objectives as their
movement grew so did their vision doctor
Tolbert small was a physician to the
Black Panthers though he wasn't a party
member they were not just people in
black jackets carrying guns they were
interested in actually doing something
for the community the Black Panthers
focused more on what they call survival
programs things like food assistance
free education free legal aid and one of
their top priorities was free Community
Healthcare most of us civilized
countries will provide these services
for the people
the Panthers realized that we didn't
have a civilized country we were not
providing any service
as a young doctor small treated
political activists like Angela Davis
and George Jackson in prison and when
Bobby Seale issued a directive for all
chapters to establish free health
clinics in 1970 the Black Panther Party
turned to dr. small to help build the
program I had all the pharmaceutical
companies donating medicines to the
Joyce Jackson free clinic
I had doctors volunteer nurses
volunteering med techs volunteering this
Sheba Haven who was a member of the
Black Panther Party says the Black
Panthers approach to health care was
radical I think that they had a great
impact on medicine in general because
they were progressive not just in the
idea that healthcare is a right but in
the way that health care is delivered
the Black Panther Party interceded in
places where the US government was
seemingly absent like its nationwide
screening program for sickle-cell
disease
it was a first the government was not
prioritizing sickle cell anemia for the
same reason that Jackie Robinson had to
be the first baseball bat baseball
player in 1948 for the same reason that
the black troops was segregated during
World War two there was racism in this
country sickle cell name was a disease
that affected mostly black folks
sickle-cell is the single most common
genetic disease in the United States and
the vast majority of patients are
african-american
it's painful and deadly and in 1970 the
country only allocated less than
$100,000 in funding I spent seven point
eight million dollars own Musco disagree
1.6 million dollars of cystic fibrosis 8
million dollars to get a man on the moon
and obviously sickle cell anemia was not
a priority then an intriguing thing
happened in 1972 John when invited Black
Panther members and collaborators to
appear on one of the most popular talk
shows of the day the Mike Douglas show
and they seized the platform to address
the problem of sickle-cell disease we've
tested 30,000 people in sickle cell for
6 cell anemia I think we've tested most
anybody in the country and just like
that sickle cell became part of the
national conversation
the Panthers use their medical
infrastructure to run tests for sickle
cell in cities all over the country so
it is objectively true
that one of the defining public health
initiatives of the early 1970s wasn't
launched by the US government but by an
organized group of socialist advocates
the initiative gains so much momentum
that President Nixon signed legislation
to aid research on finding a cure for
the disease by this point the Black
Panthers had become a major cultural
force operating on the international
stage
their philosophy shared common ground
with Maoist in China and as China began
to normalize relations with the u.s.
they invited QEP Newton to visit months
before receiving President Nixon and
that visit was a major reason why
acupuncture entered the American
mainstream acupuncture existed in the
Chinese community already but the
Chinese community in America was more
insular and more like on clay right we
reintroduced it to the rest of the world
the year after Newton visited China he
sent a delegation of 19 people to the
country including dr. small when they
came back from 1972 we started talking
about acupuncture more and we had people
practicing acupuncture on both coasts
the Black Panthers also helps run the
first health clinic to implement
five-point ear acupuncture that protocol
is still used today to treat conditions
like drug addiction and post-traumatic
stress so the group had a major
influence on health care initiatives in
the US why then does it seem like that
narrative has been hidden why are the
Panthers so often associated with this
rather than this it's partly because of
controversial FBI director J Edgar
Hoover and the little program you may
have heard of before COINTELPRO well one
of the things in jail who were always
talked about was young black people
being unifying a messiah coming to unify
and black people which was terrified of
because he was a racist COINTELPRO or
counterintelligence program was a
propaganda and surveillance operation
that the FBI used to target activists
political groups and minorities
COINTELPRO was basically designed to
destroy members of the movement that
they felt was a threat to the American
government American
life qohen tale prose goal was to
discredit leaders and divide movements
or as the FBI put it at the time to
pinpoint potential troublemakers and
neutralize them the power structure did
not want to show the survival programs
of the Panthers they wanted to paint
them as people who were committing
crimes and violence of the 290
operations carried out by COINTELPRO the
Panthers were targets of 245 for those
of you that enjoy math that's more than
84% hoover personally instructed 14
different FBI field offices to submit
imaginative and hard-hitting
counterintelligence measures aimed at
crippling the panthers they sent death
threats offensive cartoons and forge
letters to different members in an
attempt to disrupt and divide the group
perhaps the most insidious part about
COINTELPRO was how effective it was in
controlling the narrative around the
party what the FBI and the government
wanted to push this the Black Panther
Party was a black and angry group and
they were anti of life so if you want to
pay someone to devil you're not gon
paint them as providing health care
providing free food taking care of
elderly people the hospital providing a
free ambulance service like we did in
North Carolina and in a way it worked
years of police raids misinformation
incarceration and killings not only
reduced membership it left the
organization financially crippled and
ultimately unable to carry out its
social programs the Black Panther Party
was officially disbanded in 1982 today
many of the same structural inequities
that the Black Panthers fought against
continue including access to health care
that's resulted in some devastating
statistics for African Americans in 2017
the American Heart Association said that
African Americans have the worst
cardiovascular health and more deaths
from heart disease than any other group
they also have higher rates of HIV
diabetes and chronic kidney disease a
2007 study shows that African Americans
are much less likely to trust physicians
and the overall health care system
you'll see the statistics for black
folks is vastly inferior to the sistex
or why
and the Panthers recognized that those
racism in healthcare and which is why
they got involved and trying to provide
healthcare for the community but the
Black Panther party's legacy lives on
many Panthers and volunteers with the
party have gone on to work long careers
in public health and medicine even the
New York health commissioner Mary
Bassett spent her early career
volunteering in the Black Panthers free
clinic the legacy of the Black Panther
Party will never be forgotten because
people those things are embedded within
people's families shortly before he was
killed by police in 1969 Black Panther
Fred Hampton said this and that
revolution always included a demand for
health care as a basic human right hey
fam thanks so much for watching don't
forget to Like share subscribe and
follow and let us know in the comments
if you knew anything about the Black
Panthers healthcare legacy if you feel
like there are any solutions they
brought back then which could work today
and tell us also what you want to see us
do next we'll see you next Sunday